1705.04312v4 [stat ME] 23 Jun 2018

arXiv

FDR-Corrected Sparse Canonical Correlation
Analysis with Applications to Imaging Genomics

Alexej Gossmann, Pascal Zille, Vince Calhoun, and Yu-Ping Wang

Abstract—Reducing the number of false discoveries is presently
one of the most pressing issues in the life sciences. It is of
especially great importance for many applications in neuroimag-
ing and genomics, where datasets are typically high-dimensional,
which means that the number of explanatory variables exceeds
the sample size. The false discovery rate (FDR) is a criterion that
can be employed to address that issue. Thus it has gained great
popularity as a tool for testing multiple hypotheses. Canonical
correlation analysis (CCA) is a statistical technique that is used to
make sense of the cross-correlation of two sets of measurements
collected on the same set of samples (e.g., brain imaging and
genomic data for the same mental illness patients), and sparse
CCA extends the classical method to high-dimensional settings.
Here we propose a way of applying the FDR concept to sparse
CCA, and a method to control the FDR. The proposed FDR
correction directly influences the sparsity of the solution, adapting
it to the unknown true sparsity level. Theoretical derivation
as well as simulation studies show that our procedure indeed
keeps the FDR of the canonical vectors below a user-specified
target level. We apply the proposed method to an imaging
genomics dataset from the Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental
Cohort. Our results link the brain connectivity profiles derived
from brain activity during an emotion identification task, as
measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (f{MRI), to
the corresponding subjects’ genomic data.

Index Terms—fMRI analysis, genome, machine learning, prob-
abilistic and statistical methods.

I. INTRODUCTION

C ANONICAL correlation analysis (due to Hotelling, (ip.
or CCA, is a classical statistical technique, which is
used to make sense of the cross-correlation of two sets of
measurements collected on the same set of samples. More
precisely, given two sets of random variables, CCA identifies
linear combinations of each, which have maximum correlation
with each other. The coefficients of these linear combinations
of features are called canonical vectors. Like many classical
statistical techniques, CCA fails in high-dimensional settings,
when the number of variables in either of the two cross-
correlated datasets exceeds the number of samples. For ap-
plication to high-dimensional data, several methods of sparse
canonical correlation analysis (sparse CCA, or sCCA) have
been proposed, where sparsity is imposed on the canonical

A. Gossmann is with the Bioinnovation PhD Program, Tulane University,
New Orleans, LA 70118 USA.

Y.-P. Wang and P. Zille are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118 USA.

V. Calhoun is with The Mind Research Network, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131 USA, and also with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131 USA.

vectors (e.g., see ). Many applications have demon-
strated the usefulness of sparse CCA methods. For example
they are commonly used in genomics to analyze datasets
consisting of two genomic assays for the same set of subjects
or cells (e.g., 5]. (6) among many others). They have also
been successfully employed for the analysis of neuroimaging
and imaging genomics datasets (e.g., 7. (8). such as brain
imaging and DNA sequence data for the same set of brain
disease or mental illness patients.

However, most of the widely used sparse CCA methods
determine the level of sparsity of the canonical vectors based
on criteria of model fit. Different types of cross-validation
procedures have been proposed for sparse CCA (e.g., 4.
(6). (8), sometimes incorporating criteria such as the AIC or
BIC (e.g., (9). and a permutation based method is proposed
in BI. In some cases authors simply impose a certain level
of sparsity on the solution vectors (e.g., (5). which heavily
relies on the appropriateness of such prior assumptions. In
general, the behavior of the selection procedures for the
sparsity parameters in sparse CCA is not well understood, and
there is a lack of theoretical guarantees regarding the recovery
of an appropriate sparsity level of the sparse CCA solution.

In this work we propose a definition of false discovery
rate (FDR) for canonical vectors, which is subsequently used
as a Statistical criterion to determine an appropriate spar-
sity level for a sparse CCA solution. The proposed FDR
criterion is a generalization of the conventional FDR
to canonical correlation analysis. With the aim of reliably
obtaining canonical vectors with FDR below a user-specified
level g, we propose an FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure.
Up to a (small) proportion of false discoveries, which our
method keeps on average far below a user-specified level gq,
the FDR-corrected sparse CCA method is shown to produce
canonical vectors consisting only of features that are truly
cross-correlated between the two analyzed datasets. Roughly,
our proposed procedure consists of the following two steps: (1)
we use a subsample of the data to fit a (conventional) sparse
CCA model; and (2) we use the remainder of the dataset to
perform an FDR correction on the result of step (1).

With a theoretical derivation as well as simulation studies
we show that our procedure indeed keeps the FDR of the
canonical vectors at or below a user-specified target level.
Additionally, we apply our method to an imaging genomics
dataset from the Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental Cohort
(PNC). We use sparse CCA to identify relationships between
the subjects’ DNA sequence data, and their functional brain

Copyright ©2018 IEEE. Accepted for publication in the IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution

requires IEEE permission. See |http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

/n/nconnectivity profiles, which are measures derived from neu-
ral activity during an emotion identification (EMID) task,
whereby the neural activity is measured by functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). The general goal of the presented
application example is to gain understanding on how indi-
vidual subjects’ genetic makeup relates to their EMID-related
brain connectivity measures, and vice versa. Our real data
results are consistent with those reported elsewhere in the
literature, demonstrating the validity of the method.

Il. CANONICAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS

In this section we describe the data structure and the
notation that we use throughout the rest of the paper. This
section also introduces the classical CCA method, as well as
the standard approach to sparse CCA.

A. Assumed data structure and notation

Let x“), x),...,x(™ © IR?* be independent (0, Dx)-
distributed vectors, and let y“), y,... ,y(™ © R®Y be inde-
pendent (0, Sy )-distributed vectors, where Ux € R?X*Px
and Ny € R’Y*?Y are symmetric positive definite.

Assume that for all k € {1,...,n}, the cross-covariance
matrix

Cov (x, y) = Dixy © RPX*PY

. oxy .
has entries pX;* for i € {1,...
and assume that

px} and j € {1,...,py},

Cov (x.y) =0,ifk Al.

Similarly, for i,j € {1,..., px} we denote the entries of Ux

by px;, and the entries of Sy by pj; for i,j € {1,...,py}.
We define random matrices X € R"*?* and Y € R"*PY

by

(x0yt (v)
en [07] yf")
(x7 yr)”

Thus, we can think of X and Y as two datasets containing
respectively px and py features collected for n independent
samples, where the features in the two datasets are cross-
correlated with cross-covariance matrix Uixy. In that sense,
the matrix [XY] is the combined dataset with covariance
structure given by the matrix

qd)

Please note that, even though all presented analytical deriva-
tions pre-suppose Gaussian data, we investigate departures
from this distributional assumption in the simulation studies

of Section

B. Classical CCA

Standard formulation of CCA [I] seeks for vectors u € R?*
and v € R?Y to maximize the sample correlation between Xu
and Yv. Thus, the CCA optimization problem is given by

1
argmax —ul XTYv,

argmax Cov(Xu,Yv) =
ucRPx ,veRPy 1

u€RPX ,veERPY

subject to

— 1
Var(Xu) = saqu xt xu =1,

Var(Yv) =1.

The solution to this optimization problem, (U,¥), is called
the first pair of canonical vectors. The linear combinations of
features, XU and Y¥, are called the first pair of canonical
variates. Subsequent pairs of canonical variates are restricted
to be uncorrelated with the previous ones. For more detail we

refer to {IT}.

C. Sparse CCA

The conventional CCA becomes degenerate if n <
max {px,py}, which is often the case in neuroimaging and
other biomedical applications. Sparse CCA (e.g., (4))
extends CCA to high-dimensional data by imposing a sparsity
assumption on the CCA solution. Sparsity is achieved by
utilizing penalty terms, such as the £;-norm, on the canonical
vectors. This results in a unique solution even when px, py >
n.

Most commonly the ¢;-penalty is used in order to enforce
the sparsity assumption on the canonical vectors. The resulting
penalized CCA problem, which is introduced in 2}. is given
by

1
argmax —u’ XTYv,
uéRPX ,veRPy Tt

(2)

subject to

lulls < 1 [Ivlls <1, lull < cr, lvls < e2-

However, the determination of the sparsity level, or the model
tuning parameters c, and co, remains a challenging problem,
and a topic of ongoing research, as briefly discussed in
Section

Higher-order pairs of canonical vectors can be found by
applying sparse CCA to a residual matrix, obtained from X7Y
and the previously found canonical variates (see (2).

III. DEFINING FALSE DISCOVERY RATE (FDR) FOR SPARSE
CCA

It is not clear how the well-known definition of FDR (due to
[10}), which is widely used in multiple hypothesis testing, can
be carried over to sparse CCA. In this work, we first propose
an adaptation of the FDR concept to the context of sparse
CCA, and then introduce a method which ensures that the
FDR is kept below a given threshold. Since we have a pair of
canonical vectors u and v, we consider the FDR in u and in v
separately. In most applications of sparse CCA the matrices X
and Y will typically correspond to two totally different types
of features (such as genomics vs. brain imaging), and mixing
/n/nthem within one common set of variables with a combined
FDR does not seem appropriate.

For the sake of clarity, we present in the following the
FDR derivation for the canonical vector u only. An identical
derivation can be used for the canonical vector v.

The population-level formulation of CCA seeks to max-
imize Cov(x!u, y’v) under the constraints that Var(x?u) =
1 = Var(y? v), where x ~ N(0, Ex) and y ~ N(0, Ny) are
random vectors distributed as the rows of X and Y respec-
tively (cf., the sample formulation of CCA in Section [II-B).
Let U be an estimate of the canonical vector u. For each
ie {1,2,...,px}, we say that the estimated coefficient a;
represents a false discovery of the ith feature of X, if i; 40
but wu; does not affect the value of Cov(x7u, y7v). Notice that
the coefficient u; contributes to Cov(x?u, y7'v) only through
the multiplicative term

py
uj» Cov(xi,y?v) = uj - ) UjPR}
j=l

It follows that the estimated coefficient %; represents a false
discovery of the ith feature of X, if and only if a; 4 0 but
*Y 1 Ujphj = 0 (or equivalently, if @; A 0 but the ith
element of x is uncorrelated with the canonical variable y7 v).
Thus, given the canonical vector v € R?”, the problem of
identifying which non-zero entries of an estimate 0 represent

false discoveries can be recast as testing the null hypothesis

PY

HH; : So eyes = 0,
j=l

for each i € {1,2,...,px} with a; £0.

Let Ra be the number of non-zero entries in a sparse CCA
estimate U1. Let Vg denote the number of false rejections, that
is, the number of indices i € {1,2,...,px}, such that a; 40
but an Upp =0.

Analogously, define Ry and Vg for the canonical vector V.

(3)

Definition | (False discovery rate). Define the false discovery
rate in u as

a Va
Fone) =P (Serna) “
and analogously define,
a we
FDR(¥) :=E (coticy) : (5)

In the next section we rely on this definition of FDR as an
optimality criterion and as a guide in the identification of an
appropriate sparsity level for the canonical vectors.

IV. FDR-CORRECTED SPARSE CCA

Because the random vectors (x,y), (x@,y@), ...,
(x,y), which form the rows of X and Y, are indepen-
dent and identically distributed, we have that

E(X?TYv) =n-Uxy-v

for any v € RY. It follows that the null hypothesis H; given
by Equation is equivalent to
H;: E(XTYv), =0.

Motivated by that observation, the main idea of our FDR-
correcting approach is to first obtain initial estimates Gi and
¥) of the canonical vectors, and then to test null hypotheses
of the form

HY :E(x7¥v) =0, (6)
for each i € {1,2,...,px} with a; A 0, and
HO) :E (yrxa) =0, (7)

j
for each j € {1,2,...,py} with 6; A 0, in order to determine
which entries of u and v are truly non-zero.

A. Asymptotic distribution

In order to be able to make probabilistic statements about
the estimators of the sparse canonical vectors, we need to
know the respective distributions of X’Yv and Y7 Xu. In the
following we will focus on X7Yv, but the obtained results
clearly carry over to Y? Xu, by swapping X and Y as well
as u and v.

Theorem 1 (Asymptotic Normality). Let the random matrices
X and Y be defined as above. For any vector v € R®Y, it
holds that

1
vn (-xtyv - 1) , N(0,2), (8)
n
where ps € R?* has entries
py
Hs = ovens, (9)
j=l

and where Q. € RPX*?X has entries

124 py
wij = ( na ( ne) + piv" Dyv. (10)
k=1

k=1

Proof. The proof is given in Appendix

B. The FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure

We propose an FDR correction procedure for sparse CCA
based on the general idea outlined at the beginning of Sec-
tion [IV] However several important aspects need to be taken
into consideration when designing such a procedure. In order
to appl Theorem[I] for purposes of testing hypotheses of the
form ig and (7). the preliminary estimates @ and ¥© as
well as estimates of their associated variances (as given by
Equation {10p) need to be obtained based on data that are
independent from the dataset used for the hypotheses tests.
Furthermore, the variances need to be estimated independently
of G and ¥©, because otherwise the variance estimates
corresponding to the non-zero entries of @°) and ¥ will be
inflated.
/n/nProcedure 1 (FDR-corrected sparse CCA). We propose an Y(?) by their versions containing only the columns
FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure consisting of the fol- indexed by 1 and 1 respectively, which amounts to
lowing steps: a dimensional reduction. Due to Step 2 the cardinality of

1. Data subsetting. We divide each of the data matrices X each of these sets, [| and raw |, should be sufficiently

and Y into three subsets of sizes ng, n1, and ng, i.e.,

smaller than nz. Therefore we are now dealing with a
low-dimensional poo so that we are confident in

(0) (0)
xe 0 andY = (0) where app ising Theorem |1] Now, denoting the ith entry of
x2) ya] (XO) YOGO by

XO ERroxpx, XO) ERmXPx, X(2) € Rr2XPx |
YO eRrmxrpy yO eRnxpy, yl) € Rmxpy
no +n, + ng = n. In practice the split needs to be
random, and the three subsets have to follow the same
distribution.

. Preliminary estimates of the canonical vectors obtained
on the first subset. We obtain the preliminary estimates
Gand ¥) by applying the ¢;-penalized CCA, as given
by Equation Q). with a liberal choice for the tuning
parameters c, and co, to X() and Y(). At this step
we aim to capture all truly non-zero entries of the true
canonical vectors u and v within the support of the
preliminary estimates G©) and ¥), However we require
that neither G@® nor ¢© has more than nz non-zero
entries, which is mainly needed for Step 5 below. The
exact strategy of choosing the penalty parameters in this
step is presented for each considered application of the
procedure, at the time when the respective application
is discussed in Sections B} and [VI

. Covariance structure estimation on the second subset.

We use the matrices X and Y@) to obtain 5“, the
maximum likelihood estimate of the covariance matrix
of [Xx Y].

Gis (xe) "ves |

a

under the null hypothesis Theorem[I]implies the approx-
imation

1
(a8 L=
where @j,; is defined according to Equation (10)
with 9 and S® from Steps 2 and 3. substi-
tuted in place of v and ©». Likewise, from The-
orem we obtain an asymptotic distribution for
(+ (YO)7 x@a|y = 30) under the null hy-
pothesis. We calculate p-values for the hypotheses tests
and based on these asymptotic distributions.
6. FDR correction. After choosing a desired FDR level
€ (0, 1), in order to control the FDR at the level g, we
apply the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to the p-values
obtained in Step 5. The procedure is applied twice — sep-
arately for the two sets of hypotheses {Hi we 1k

A
and {H)|5 e 19 This results in a new, FDR-

corrected, solution U and ¥, which is given up to a
normalization constant by

a) ~N (0,04), (3)

. Statement of the hypotheses to be tested. Let I and n (XTYGM) for any rejected HM,
(0) a. F Ui i= ‘ .
I,’ be the sets of indices corresponding to the non-zero 0, otherwise.
entries of G and ¥, ie., ~ (v)
©) ©) . (v7 xa), ; for any rejected H;
gen bj :=
Ty? = {i a; F 0}, t 0, otherwise.

(0
IO c= fj: af dg O}.

For all i € 1 and all j € 1 we intend to test
whether u; and v; are truly non-zero. We slightly adjust
the hypotheses tests of form (6) and (7) to the present
framework, where for each i € 1° ) and each j € 1
we test,

T
HO: B (x?) Y2GO

a

v= 00] =0, (11)

a

HO: [(v@) xan v= 50] =0. (12)
j

Notice that the tests and are heuristics in the
sense that they approximate the tests (6) and {

. P-value calculation using ihe third Set. Since i a; (0) _ =0
() _ 6 for all i ¢ 1 and j ¢ ie ) we can
remove the ith column of X@) and the jth column
of Y) for every i ¢ TO and every j ¢ m
without affecting any of the products in Equations
and {12}. Thus we can replace the matrices X?) and

and 6;

Of course every step in Procedure [I] would benefit from a
larger size of the utilized subsample, and there is a trade-off
between no, 21, and ng to be made. However, for simplicity
of exposition, in what follows we always use subsamples of
equal size with no = [n/3}.

As evidenced by the derivation of the method, given that
the true solution is sparse, the FDR correction step adapts the
sparsity of the estimator to the unknown sparsity of the true
solution.

V. SIMULATION STUDIES

We performed a number of simulation studies, in order to
evaluate the performance of Procedure [I] the proposed FDR-
corrected sparse CCA method, in both idealized and more

'Notice that the FDR correction can just as well be be applied with two
different levels q, and gy for the two sets of hypotheses, or it can also be
applied just once to the combined set of hypotheses A!) and Ho for
i € 1 and j € 1{°), in order to control the FDR of the “full model”
(controlling the FDR for each of u and v separately at level q in general
does not imply FDR control of the “full” model at the same level q).
/n/nrealistic scenarios. The procedure was derived based on the
assumption that _X and Y have Gaussian entries. Here, we first
present simulation results under such Gaussian scenarios, in
order to verify that the proposed procedure indeed controls the
FDR under the assumptions that its derivation relies on. Then
we show simulation studies evaluating the performance of the
method on non-Gaussian data, which are generated based on
real single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data, and closely
resemble the data in the real imaging genomics application
presented in Section [V]] All simulation studies, which do not
involve human subject data, can be reproduced with the code

available at https://github.com/agisga/FDRcorrectedSCCA

A. Simulation study with Gaussian data

Although we consider both, low-dimensional (n < px, py)
and high-dimensional (n > px, py) scenarios, in this section
we present only the simulations with high-dimensional data
due to the higher relevance of that case to the intended
biomedical applications. Due to given space constraints the
simulation studies for the low-dimensional case are found in
the Supplementary Materials (unsurprisingly the performance
of our method improves as the dimensionality of the problem
decreases). In all simulations of this section we use n = 600,
and px = py = 1500. We denote by sx the number of
variables in X that are truly cross-correlated (i.e., have been
generated with a non-zero correlation) with some variables in
Y. Likewise, we denote by sy the number of variables in Y
that are truly cross-correlated with some variables in X. For
the simulations in this section we consider all combinations
between sx,sy € {1,20, 40,60, 80, 100, 120}. The matrices
o*, DY, and 5*” are block-wise constant, and are populated
with the following entries.

1, if i=),
php = 405, if i#j,i<sx.j <sx,
0.1, otherwise.
1, if i=), (14)
prj = 405, if iF j,i<sy,j <sy,
0.1, otherwise.
yxy — {04 if i<sx,j<sy,
os 0, otherwise.

In particular, the cross-correlation between features of X and
Y is of only mediocre strength, having a magnitude of 0.4.
Furthermore, the choice of parameters given in Equation (14)
ensures that the covariance matrix

(15)

is positive definite. A visualization of the block-wise constant
structure of such a covariance matrix © is given in Figure [I]

We perform Procedure |1| with three choices for the target
FDR level g = 0.05,0.1,0.2. For Step 2 of the procedure
(estimation of preliminary solution G,7©)) we use the £,-
penalized CCA of Equation @. where we tune the penalty
parameters such that @) and ¥©) each contain approximately
=f = 100 non-zero entries. Enforcing the sparsity

n

2

0.10.10.1040.4 0
0.10.10.1040.4 0

1.00
A.
0.50

0.25

0.40.4 0

0.40.4 0
0.00

coo
coo
coo

(for clarity of representation the matrix dimensions are much smaller here
than in the simulation study). The «- and y-axes represent the indices of the
(px +py) columns in the matrix [XY] and the magnitude of the covariance
of each pair of variables is mapped to the color scale.

of G@ and ¥ to be restricted in such a way results in a
low-dimensional problem in Step 5 of the procedure (the p-
value calculation) where we apply the asymptotic distribution
of Theorem [I] However note that by following this approach
we implicitly assume that sx, sy < 4 = 100. This is true for
most but not for all of the considered simulation settings, and
we investigate the effects on the corresponding results below.

We compare the proposed method to the widely-used ¢,-
penalized CCA in conjunction with multiple strategies for the
é,-penalty parameter selection. An excellent implementation
of the ¢;-penalized CCA, as given in Equation [2] is available
in the R package PMA [2], which uses the parametrization
cy = AL: px and cp = rz + \/py with 1,A2 € (0,1)
to be selected manually or by an automated procedure. When
selecting an optimal penalty level in sparse CCA it is common
practice to set Ay = Ag =: A (e.g., the default setting of
the automated selection procedure CCA.permute in the R
package PMA 2p. because this substantially decreases the
computational burden by reducing the 2D parameter search
to a 1D search. For purposes of comparison to our method,
we consider the following strategies for the selection of A in
£,-penalized CCA.

o Fixed parameter values \ =
= 0.3 (moderately sparse).

o Automated selection of an optimal \ by the permutation
based procedure of where, as per the default settings
of the R package PMA 2). X is selected from among 10
equispaced values between 0.1 and 0.7.

o A 5-fold cross-validation (CV) approach which selects
the \ value that maximizes the canonical correlation
Cor(X%, Y¥V) on the test set. As in the permutation based
approach ten equispaced values between 0.1 and 0.7 are
considered for X.

0.01 (very sparse) and

Notice that these methods are performed on the whole data,
while Procedure}1|splits the data into three subsets, effectively
performing the CCA step on only a third of the data. Nonethe-
less Procedure [1] outperforms these competing methods in
many respects as we will see below.

The simulation is performed 500 times for every com-
bination of the considered methods and parameter values.

/n/nIn every setting we estimate FDR(G) and FDR(¥) as the
mean values of the false discovery proportions (FDP) obtained
from the respective 500 simulation runs, whereby FDP(¥) :=
(Ve/ max {Rz, 1}) (and likewise FDP(t), see Equations
and @)). We also record some other statistics from the
simulations, such as the estimated true positive rate (TPR,
also known as sensitivity), which is the expected proportion
of correctly identified features among all the truly significant
features. Like FDR, TPR is computed separately for i and
¥v, and is denoted by TPR(ti) and TPR(¥) respectively.
The true value of TPR (¥) is estimated as an average of the
true positive proportions (TPP) observed in the 500 respective
simulation runs, whereby TPP(¥) := (Rg — Ve) /sy (and
analogously TPP(@)). Naturally, it is desirable to have a high
TPR and a low FDR, but there is a trade-off between the two
quantities.

Figure shows the estimated FDR(¥), and Figure
shows the estimated TPR(V) for every considered method
at every considered simulation setting. Because X and Y are
generated by the same procedure with the same dimensions
and with the same values considered for sx and sy, and
because the proposed method is symmetric in the estimation
of u and v, the performance of the estimators G and ¥ is
exactly the same. Thus, for clarity of presentation we omit
the inclusion of results for 0 in the figures of this section.

We observe that the estimated FDR of the proposed method
consistently stays below the target upper bound q, being in fact
a little too conservative by reaching at most a level of about
q/2. This validates our method’s FDR-correcting behavior,
which is its intended purpose.

Since we have enforced that the preliminary estimates a)
and ¥) each have about oe = 100 non-zero entries, thus
implicitly assuming that sy and sy are sufficiently smaller
than 100, the performance in simulations with sy,sy <
80 differs from the performance observed when sx,sy €
{80, 100, 120}. As expected we have that FDR(¥V) © 0 when
sy > 100. Similarly we observe that as sx is increasing
from 1 to 80, FDR(¥) grows towards the nominal level q and
TPR(¥) grows towards 1. The growth behavior is however
significantly slowed down or stagnates when sx > 80.

Compared to the FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure,
the other considered sparse CCA methods fail to consistently
provide a satisfactory FDR level across all considered sparsity
settings. Apart from our technique only the permutation based
method of [2] adapts to the true sparsity of the data, and yields
an FDR that consistently stays at or below a level of about
0.2 regardless of the sparsity of the true solution. However,
as evidenced by Figure in most settings our procedure
has a higher TPR than the permutation based method. Among
all considered methods and across all sparsity settings the 5-
fold CV based procedure results in the highest observed TPR
values, but its FDR values are also among the largest ones.
This can be expected because the utilized cross-validation
criterion (which is similar to the one used in zy) aims to
maximize model fit rather than to avoid false discoveries, i.e.,
the canonical correlation is maximized at the expense of the
selection of many irrelevant features. Moreover, it is evident
from the two figures that £;-penalized CCA with the penalty

parameter \ fixed at an arbitrary value (i.e., selected in a way
that is not data-driven) will rarely produce the desired outcome
in terms of maintaining a low FDR and a high TPR.

Additionally, we investigate the distribution of TPP values
achieved by our method. When the cross-correlation structure
between X and Y is as in the above example, where the
cross-correlated variables fall into a single correlated block
within X and a single correlated block within Y (as depicted
in Figure[I), the sparse CCA procedure has a strong tendency
to either select all of the cross-correlated features or none.
Likewise, when the cross-correlated features of X (or Y)
fall within k distinct correlated blocks within X (or Y), the
TPP distribution seems to be discrete and concentrated at (at
most) (k + 1) distinct values which are spaced apart at equal
distances between 0 and 1. That is, when the cross-correlated
features fall into distinct correlation blocks within X or Y,
the method tends to either select an entire correlated block of
variables within X or Y, or to miss it entirely. We confirmed
this phenomenon with additional simulation studies, where
the correlation structure within X and within Y is varied
respectively. Figure [3] shows the TPP distribution, when the
cross-correlated features, of which there are 60 in X and 60
in Y, fall within k € {1,2,3,15} distinct correlation blocks
within each matrix. The distributions’ discrete character with
at most (k + 1) peaks can be clearly observed, and as k
gets larger (e.g., k = 15) the TPP distribution appears more
continuous. In fact a similar behaviour can also be observed
for other sparse CCA methods.

Summing everything up, the simulation studies of this
section support the theoretical derivation of the FDR-corrected
sparse CCA method of Procedure [I] As expected, the method
controls the false discovery rates at the specified level q
very well, when applied to Gaussian data. This adds empir-
ical evidence to the properties implied by the mathematical
derivation. Moreover we observe that Procedure [1] achieves
the best trade-off between FDR and TPR when compared
to several other commonly-used sparse CCA methods. It
generally outperforms the permutation based method of
and the very sparse ¢,-penalized CCA (A = 0.01) in terms of
both FDR and TPR; and while some other methods (the ¢)-
penalized CCA with fixed A = 0.3, or in conjunction with 5-
fold CV) generally achieve a higher TPR, they perform poorly
in terms of FDR in comparison to the proposed method.

B. Simulation study with non-Gaussian data (investigating
robustness to distributional assumptions)

In this section we consider more realistic simulation studies
in the context of imaging genomics. The matrix X represents
SNP data, which are not normally distributed, and the matrix
Y represents approximately Gaussian features obtained from
brain fMRI data. There are n = 956 subjects in the dataset
(i.e., the number rows in X and in Y). We use real SNP data,
which are also used in the real data analysis of Section
(see Section [VI-A] for more detail about the data), to generate
X, as described in the following. First, within each gene, PCA
is performed on the SNPs that correspond to that gene; i.e.,
for each gene, PCA is performed separately on a sub-matrix
/n/n1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.10
q 0.05
$
=
z
a
ira
3 ate —— FDR-corrected SCCA (q =0.2)
— 0.60 = -@ =» FDR-corrected SCCA (q =0.1)
é 0.40 — © — FDR~corrected SCCA (q =0.05)
- -& ~ + LLSCCA: 5-fold CV
0.20
ste++ L1SCCA: permutation—based
0.10
0.08 = o-= LI SCCA: fixed penalty (0.3)
—-©—- L1SCCA: fixed penalty (0.01),
w
yg
Ny
$ Be
Ss @—~-—-¢-—-©-— ©--¢--6 || © -»--¢--~ - ©--¢--« ~—-@—-o-— ~--¢--©
x
a sx =100 3x =120 ° e807 00S
fas
B —2— FDR-corected SCCA (q =0.2)
£ = -@ =» FDR-corrected SCCA (q =0.1)
5
é — © — FDR-corrected SCCA (q =0.05)
~-& -- LISCCA: 5-fold CV
Meg tte +---- LL SCCA: permutation—based
x & — = LI SCCA: fixed penalty (0.3)
N
&L el < —~©—- L1SCCA: fixed penalty (0.01),
0.00 Wr -e--e -~--6--0 + -e--6 ~~ Sao ~~~ --6 -~
0 25 50 75 100 125 0 25 50 15 100 125 0 25 50 75 100 125
sy

(b) Estimated TPR by true sparsity of u and v.

Fig. 2. The performance of Procedure[] the proposed FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure, at different target FDR levels q = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 is compared to the
,-penalized sparse CCA (L1 SCCA) with the penalty parameters either set to a fixed value (high sparsity: \ = 0.01, or moderate sparsity: 4 = 0.3), or selected
via the permutation based method of [2], or selected via a 5-fold cross-validation procedure (an approach based on . The matrices X,Y € R500 1500
have Gaussian entries. All values are averaged over 500 simulation runs performed at each combination of parameters, and all error bars correspond to +2SE.
(a) The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) in V is shown (on a square root scale) with respect to changes in sx, the number of nonzero entries of u,
and sy, the number of non-zero entries of v. The estimated FDR of Procedure ]1| always stays below the specified upper bound q, with a sharp decrease
at about sy = 70 due to the fact that the sparsity of the preliminary solution V“% was constrained to be approximately equal to 100 in the application of

Estimated FDR of other methods is either generally inflated, or not adaptive to changes in sx and sy. (b) The estimated true positive rate
(TPR, or sensitivity) of V is shown with respect to changes in sx and sy-. Procedure

is competitive with the other methods in terms of TPR, even though

its FDR is much lower than that of other methods (it achieves the best FDR-TPR trade-off). The TPR curves of Procedure[I]have a dip at sy = 100 because

the sparsity of the preliminary solution 7)

consisting of only those columns of the full SNP matrix which
contain SNP data corresponding to that particular gene. Then,
within each obtained gene-specific sub-matrix of principle
components, only those principal components that explain at
least 75% of the variance within that gene are kept as features
for further analysis. The sub-matrices of features that were
retained for each gene, when concatenated, constitute the full
matrix of genomic features. Many of the resulting features
are clearly non-Gaussian, because many variables are heavily

was constrained to be approximately equal to 100 in the procedure’s application.

skewed, and many are clearly discrete|“| Of the generated
60372 genomic features, px = 10000 variables are randomly
selected to form the matrix X in each repetition of the sim-
ulation. The matrix Y is randomly sampled with independent
standard normal entries, consisting of py = 10000 columns.
We cross-correlate the data in X and Y via the following
procedure. Given, the number of cross-correlated features,

2For example, of the resulting 60372 variables, 8356 attain 10 or fewer
distinct values, and (after standardization to sample standard deviation of 1)
the method of moments estimator of skewness is greater than 1 for about 10%
of all variables, and greater than $ for about 28% of all variables.
/n/n1 cross—correlated blocks 2 cross—correlated blocks

08
0.75 06
0.50 04
0.25 02
0.00 0.0 i

3 cross—correlated blocks 15 cross—correlated blocks

03
0.4 02
0.2 01
0.0 = 0.0 ==

0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.25 0.50
TPP(v)

Proportion

0.75 1.00

Fig. 3. Shown is the empirical distribution of TPP(¥) across 500 applications
of the FDR-corrected sparse CCA method (Procedure {I}. The matrices
X,YE 1R900x 900 have Gaussian entries. The cross-correlated features, of
which there are 60 in X and 60 in Y, fall within k € {1,2,3, 15} distinct
correlation blocks within each matrix. The resulting TPP distributions are
discrete and concentrated at (k + 1) or fewer values, while appearing more
continuous for larger k.

s € {1,2,...,p}, where p := px = py, and a parameter
pX® € (0,1), we first generate a latent variable z € R” with
standard normal entries. Then, for each i € {1,2,...,¢ s}, we
replace the column x; of X with

(VI=P) m+ (VO)
and likewise we replace y; with
( 1 =”) yit (ve*”) z

Thus, after the transformation, for the cross-correlated data it
holds that

Cor(x;, yj) = var ((Ve*”) z) = pry

for all i,j € {1,2,...,s}. The considered numbers of cross-
correlated variables are s = 30,60,90,120,150. For the
amount of cross-correlation we consider two choices, p*¥ =
0.5 and pX¥ = 0.9 (we restrict the presentation to positive
cross-correlations, because negative cross-correlations did not
yield any noticeable changes in the simulation results). The
simulation with each combination of parameters is performed
1000 times.

We apply Procedure |I] with a target level q = 0.1 to this
non-Gaussian dataset. In Step 2 of the procedure, we tune
the penalty parameters such that the preliminary estimates

© and ¥ each contain approximately WEES =~ 160 non-
zero entries (see Section fora discussion. of this choice).
Figure |4a] shows that the estimated FDR (ti) and FDR (¥)
levels are always nearly equal to or below the target upper
bound q. The FDR values are close to q when s is substantially
below 160, which is the enforced number of non-zero entries
in G@© and ¥. Figure [4b]shows the estimated TPR (@) and
TPR (¥). As one would expect, the TPR values increase with
an increase in s or in p**. One drawback seen in Figure [4b]
is that our method is very low-powered in extremely sparse
settings, more so than the results from Section [V-A] which is
explained by the higher dimensionality of the data here. To
summarize, we conclude that the proposed procedure retains
its FDR-controlling properties on this non-Gaussian dataset,
which is structured similarly to the real data analysed in the

next section. This gives us confidence on the application of
the proposed procedure to real data.

VI. APPLICATION TO IMAGING GENOMICS

This section presents an application of Procedure the
proposed FDR-corrected sparse CCA procedure, to a large
imaging genomics dataset. Our goal is to identify genomic
regions which exhibit a significant relationship with brain
functional connectivity measures, and vice versa. In Sec-
tion a brief description of the data as well as of the
performed pre-processing steps is followed by a discussion
of the presence of possible confounding factors in the data.
Finally, in Section we apply the proposed procedure to
the dataset, and discuss the obtained results.

A. Data acquisition, pre-processing, and exploratory analysis

The Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental Cohort (PNC)
is a large-scale collaborative study between the Brain Be-
haviour Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania and the
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. It contains, among other
modalities, an emotion identification (EMID) fMRI task, and
SNP arrays for over 900 children, adolescents, and young
adults.

The EMID task fMRI data were pre-processed using the
software SPM12 (13). The performed pre-processing steps
included an adjustment for head movement, spatial normal-
ization to standard MNI adult template (spatial resolution
of 2mm x 2mm x 2mm), and a spatial smoothing with a
3mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. The influence of motion (6
parameters) was further addressed using a regression proce-
dure, and the functional time series were band-pass filtered
using a 0.01-0.1Hz frequency range. The pre-processed data
were decomposed into subject-specific spatial maps and time
courses using a group-level spatial ICA as implemented in the
GIFT toolbox] The number of components in group ICA was
set to C = 100. For each subject i € {1,2,...,n} a functional
connectome (FC) was estimated from the C' subject-specific
time courses as their C x C' sample covariance matrix. Gener-
ally a subject’s FC can be obtained by calculating Pearson
correlations between the blood-oxygenation-level dependent
(BOLD) time series corresponding to each pair of regions
of interest (ROD in the subject’s brain. Here we chose to
compute the stationary FC on group ICA time courses rather
than on the BOLD time series directly, in order to consolidate
the relevant signals within a smaller number of components.
Each subject’s estimated FC was flattened into a vector y;
of length ot oe) = 4950. The matrix Y € R"*“S

was
constructed as the concatenation of the vectors y; as its rows,
where i € {1,2,...,n}.

The SNP data available in PNC were acquired using 6
different platforms. We kept only the subjects genotyped by
the four most commonly used platforms (all manufactured by
Illumina). The PLINK software was used for SNP data
pre-processing, including Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium tests

~http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift/
/n/npo =0.5 eo =0.9

Estimated FDR +/—2SE

40 80 120 40 80 120
Number of cross—correlated features

— FDR(u) ---- FDR(v)

(a) Estimated FDR by sparsity of the true solution.

Fig. 4. The proposed FDR-corrected sparse CCA, Procedure[I]

oY =05 oY =0.9

1.004
075+

0.50-

0.25

0.05 +

Estimated TPR +/—2SE

40 80 120 40 80 120
Number of cross-correlated features

— TPR(u) ---- TPR(v)

(b) Estimated TPR by sparsity of the true solution.

was applied to “hybrid” data, which consist of a matrix X € R95°*10000 based on real SNP

data, and a matrix Y € R95°x10000 with random Gaussian entries. The parameter p*Y signifies the amount of cross-correlation between features of X
and Y. (a) The estimated FDR(W) and FDR(v) consistently stay below the target upper bound q = 0.1 regardless of the number of truly cross-correlated

features. The FDR values decrease as the true number of cross-correlated features approaches the bound (

n/3
2

= 160) placed on the number of non-zero

entries in G0) and 9). (b) The estimated TPR (ti) and TPR (#). TPR values increase with p*¥ , and with an increase in the number of cross-correlated

features present in the data.

with significance level le—5 for genotyping errors, extrac-
tion of common SNPs (MAF > 5%), linkage disequilibrium
pruning with threshold of 0.9 for highly correlated SNPs, and
removal of SNPs with missing call rates > 10% and samples
with missing SNPs > 5%. The remaining missing values were
imputed by Minimac3 using the reference genome from
1000 Genome Project" hase 1 data. The resulting dataset
contains values for 98804 SNPs, representing the presence of
two minor alleles by 2, one minor allele by 1, and the absence
of a minor allele by 0.

Of course the proposed FDR-corrected sparse CCA pro-
cedure addresses only one source of false discoveries — the
multiple testing problem. In practice, false discoveries may
arise due to other reasons as well, because the structure of
real world data is typically more complex than the idealized
mathematical description, and not all mathematical assump-
tions will be met. For example, in genomic studies, allele
frequencies as well as the size and composition of linkage
disequilibrium blocks may significantly differ between groups
of subjects due to systematic ancestry differences, which
may lead to spurious associations. Since the PNC samples
are multi-ethnic and were acquired with multiple genotyping
platforms, this issue needs to be properly addressed here. If the
variability in ethnicity or genotyping platform (or some other
unobserved external factor) affects only the SNP data, but does
not affect the fMRI data, we expect our method to perform
similarly well as observed empirically in the simulations of
Section [V-B] which verified the good behaviour of our method
when applied to the real SNP data as X and a synthetic
dataset as Y. However, the simulations of Section do
not cover the situation when a variable is related to both the
SNP data and the fMRI data simultaneously, in which case
it is in danger of becoming a confounder and yielding false
discoveries. Commonly, principal component analysis (PCA)
is used within an exploratory analysis context to investigate the
presence of such confounding factors in genomic studies (e.g.,

http://www. L000genom« g

see [16], [17)). After performing PCA on the SNP matrix and
on the FC matrix, we investigated, in both cases, for potential
relationships between the first 20 principle components (PCs)
and external variables such as ethnicity, genotyping platform,
and age. No external variables appeared to be strongly related
to both the SNP values and the FC features simultaneously
by the performed exploratory analyses/)| When plotting PCs
against each other, it is evident that ethnicity differences are
strongly related to the first three SNP-specific PCs, whereas no
such relationships were observed for the {MRI data. Similarly,
a PCA analysis of the considered {MRI features indicated a
clear relationship between the subjects’ FC and age values,
but (as expected) age shows no relationship with the SNP
data. No noticeable associations with the genotyping platform
differences or gender were observed from PCA analysis for
the SNP data or the considered fMRI features in this dataset.
Since no factors seem to have a clear relationship to both
the genomic and the brain imaging data simultaneously, we
proceeded with the application of the proposed FDR-corrected
SCCA procedure to this dataset (we however revisit this issue
once a set of features is identified by our method).

B. Identification of cross-correlations between genomic and
functional brain connectivity features on PNC data

We apply Procedure in to a matrix derived from the PNC
SNP data and a matrix derived from the FC values resulting
from the PNC EMID task fMRI data. The subset of PNC
subjects for whom we have both types of data available is of
size n = 811. Following the process applied in the simulations
in this analysis we tune the penalty parameters
in Step 2 of Procedure}1} such that i and ¥ each contain

. n/3 ar . :
approximately —5~ ~ 135 non-zero entries. Because we aim
to capture all relevant genomic and brain imaging features
within this limited number of non-zero entries of @°) and ¥)
respectively, we perform some feature engineering to focus

5We provide a summary of these results here; see Supplementary Materials
for more detail (available in the supplementary files/multimedia tab).
/n/nthe relevant signals within a smaller number of transformed
features. For the SNP data this is accomplished by gene-
specific PCA transformations, as described in Section
This reduces the dimensionality of the untransformed SNP
data to px = 60372 gene-level features, which form the matrix
X. In addition to consolidating the genomic variability within
a smaller number of derived features, the utilized approach
also facilitates the interpretation of the findings, because each
column of X directly corresponds to exactly one gene. The
fMRI data is transformed to functional connectivity profiles,
as described in Section whereby we obtain FC measures
on group ICA time courses rather than on the fMRI time
series directly, in order to consolidate the relevant signals
within a smaller number of components. The resulting matrix
Y has py = 4950 columns (FC features). The columns of
X and Y are standardized to have sample means equal to
zero, and sample standard deviations equal to one. We apply
Procedure [1] with an upper bound of g = 0.1 on the false
discovery rates. When we split the data into subsets in Step 1
of Procedure [I] we ensure that the empirical joint distribution
of variables representing ethnicity, genotyping platform, age
group, and gender is consistent across the generated subsets.
The obtained FDR-corrected sparse CCA solution {t,¥}
includes 129 genomic features and 107 FC features.

The sparse CCA results can help explain how genetic
variation between subjects influences the subjects’ functional
brain connectivity as estimated from fMRI during an emotion
identification task. For example, consider the top 10 most
significant genomic features (when ranked by p-values from
Step 5 of Procedure |1). As summarized in Table |I| for each
gene we found previous studies of association with cognitive
ability, brain development or connectivity, or neurodevelop-
mental disorders. This was expected given that a cognitive task
was performed by the subjects during the MRI acquisition and
that the PNC subjects belong to an age range (8-21 years)
at which crucial processes of neurodevelopment are taking
place. In fact, a recent study observes a notable variability
in the PNC cohort with respect to brain dysfunction, where
in addition to a group of healthy controls consisting of 153
PNC subjects, three groups were found to have increased
(prodromal) symptoms of attention deficit disorder (107 PNC
subjects), schizophrenia (103 PNC subjects), and depression
(85 PNC subjects).

The FC features describe pair-wise interactions of group
ICA components obtained from fMRI data (see Sectior
By extracting within each spatial component only the ROI
corresponding to the activation coefficient with the largest
absolute value, we can map the selected FC features to pairs
of ROI (we use the definitions of the AAL parcellation map
(19). The top 10 most significant FC features (according to p-
values from Step 5 of Procedure|1) are shown in Table|L] The
analysis implies that activations in these ROI correspond to the
processing of emotional faces, and are significantly regulated
by the genomic differences across subjects. For the EMID task
in PNC fMRI data the subjects viewed images of emotional
faces and were asked to label the emotion displayed. A wide
network of ROI is engaged during this task, because human
faces are complex stimuli which require the performance of

many subtasks such as basic visual processing, identification
of other individuals, and extraction of nonverbal and affective
information. Previous fMRI studies associate many of the
detected ROI with the identification or processing of emotions.
We find support in previous studies for all of the ROI shown
in Table Studies of BOLD fMRI response to images
of emotional faces identify increased positive activations in
the superior temporal gyri and the middle occipital gyri in
combination with negative activations in the superior frontal
gyri (20). positive activation in the middle frontal gyrus for
individuals with schizophrenia (20). and neural activity in the
right angular gyrus in young subjects 21}. Additionally, it has
been shown that the anterior cingulate cortex operates together
with the lateral and medial prefrontal cortex (including the
superior frontal gyrus) in order to regulate both cognitive
and emotional processing [2 Emotional processing
has also been previously associated with activations in the
supplementary motor area [23]]. The superior temporal gyrus is
also known to be associated with autism (24) (a condition that
impairs the processing of emotional faces), while the calcarine
fissure is involved in processing of visual information, and was
also found to be selectively activated during the processing of
faces in association with the intensity of the displayed emotion

[25].
Gene Previously studied in asso
DABI Autism spectrum disorder:
Pa}. Pl [29; brain development:
NAV2 Brain bio logy & Cee opment
WWOX Cognitive ability:
CNTNAP2 Autism:
velopment: s
Fa cognitive ability (linguistic processing):
42).
NELLI Brain biology & development:
PTPRT Brain | biology & de gjepment
FHIT Cc
fa ; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:
MACROD2 Sem spectrum disorder: :
LRPIB Cognitive functior
DGKB Brain biology & development: ipolar disorder:

TABLE I
Top 10 MOST SIGNIFICANT AMONG THE IDENTIFIED GENES.

Similarly we were able to find previous work that supports
our findings for many other identified genes and brain regions.
But because the rather large number of identified features
prohibits the presentation of a full literature research for
all of them, and because in this work we mainly focus on
methodology development rather than on biological insights,
we omit a further coverage of the possible biological impli-
cations of the CCA results here. However, we briefly revisit
the concern expressed in Section regarding potential
confounding effects in the application of our sparse CCA
method to the PNC data. To investigate whether ethnicity
differences may have substantially influenced the results, we
extract a subsample consisting of all African American and
Caucasian/white subjects from the analyzed data, consisting
of 313 and 406 subjects respectively, while any other distinct
ethnicity group had less than 10 subjects, and therefore was

/n/nROI #1 ROI #2
anterior cingulate and paracingu- superior frontal gyrus, medial
late gyri (left) (right)

superior temporal gyrus (left)
superior frontal gyrus, medial
(right)

middle occipital gyrus (left)
supplementary motor area (left)

supplementary motor area (left)
middle temporal gyrus (left)
middle frontal gyrus, orbital part

superior temporal gyrus (left)
superior frontal gyrus, medial (left)

superior frontal gyrus, medial (left)
anterior cingulate and paracingu-
late gyri (left)

middle occipital gyrus (left)
middle occipital gyrus (left)
superior frontal gyrus, medial (left)

(left)

middle occipital gyrus (right) superior frontal medial

(right)
angular gyrus (right)

gyrus,

calcarine fissure and surrounding
cortex (right)

TABLE II
Top 10 MOST SIGNIFICANT FC FEATURES MAPPED TO ROI PAIRS.

excluded from the following investigation. On this subsample
we obtain an individual p-value of association with ethnicity
for each genomic and for each FC feature using the ANOVA
framework. A subset containing only the ANOVA p-values
corresponding to the selected genomic (or FC) features is
formed. Then a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with significance
level 0.05 is used to compare the empirical distribution of p-
values within this subset to the empirical distribution of the
whole set of ANOVA p-values, corresponding to the whole
set of genomic (or respectively FC) features. This comparison
yields that the genomic as well as the FC features selected
as significant by our method indeed tend to exhibit a much
stronger association with ethnicity than other genomic or FC
features. Thus there is a possibility that some of the identified
genomic and FC features may have been determined by sys-
tematic ancestry differences in the sample. The fact that we can
find previous work that supports our finding provides evidence
to the claim of no ethnic confounding, but unfortunately
this question cannot be fully resolved without an analysis
on new data. Using an analogous approach with respect to
other external factors such as genotyping platform, age, and
gender, no similar effects have been observed, supporting the
initial conclusion of Section AJ that these factors are not
confounding the analysis.

To conclude, we have identified sparse sets of genes and FC
features carrying a substantial amount of cross-correlation in
a multi-ethnic cohor(> while correcting for the type of false
discoveries which appear as cross-correlated due to random
noise in a high-dimensional problem. These results, however,
should be taken with care, because some of the identified
cross-correlated features may represent indirect relationships
by proxy of systematic ancestry differences.

VII. DISCUSSION

As discussed in Section [I] model selection in sparse CCA,
especially as it pertains to the unknown sparsity level, is
largely an unsolved problem. In this work we have proposed
a notion of FDR in the context of sparse CCA as a criterion

Also of note is that the ethnicity distribution in PNC is similar to much
of the North American population.

for the selection of an appropriate sparsity level. At the same
time we have proposed an FDR-corrected sparse CCA method,
which is adaptive to the unknown true sparsity of the canonical
vectors. With theoretical arguments and a series of simulation
studies we have shown that the proposed method controls the
FDR of sparse CCA estimators at a user-specified level.

Interestingly, even though our method was analytically
derived under Gaussian assumptions, in the considered non-
Gaussian simulations it still achieved FDR control. Thus it
would be interesting to extend the theoretical argumentation
for FDR control of the proposed method beyond the Gaussian
scenarios. It would also be valuable to investigate better
ways of selecting the sparsity constraints on the preliminary
estimates 1 and ¥(), such that all cross-correlated features
of X and Y are identified. Especially in the high-dimensional
case a trade-off arises, because when G) and ¥) are too
dense, the applicability of the asymptotic distribution from
Theorem|[]]becomes questionable, and the FDR-correction step
can significantly lose power. In fact, the FDR-correction step
in our procedure would improve substantially, if we had a
theoretical result which is analogous to Theorem/[I}but regards
v as a random variable and considers the asymptotic behaviour
of XTYv as px,py — oo. Furthermore, especially in high-
dimensional scenarios, the proposed method tends to be too
conservative, having an FDR substantially below the nominal
level. An adjustment that would result in an FDR equal to the
nominal level is very desirable, because it would increase the
detection power. These are the important theoretical questions
that we leave for future research. As to the application in
imaging genomics, there is clearly a potential for improvement
in how the genomic and brain fMRI data are represented as
features within X and Y. In Section B] we transformed
the SNP data using PCA within each gene, and applied
group ICA to the fMRI data, before the application of sparse
CCA. This allowed us to select features at the gene and
ROI level. Alternatively, one could apply sparse CCA to the
untransformed {0,1,2}-valued SNP data and to voxel-wise
fMRI contrasts, and then during the FDR-correction step one
could consolidate the voxel specific p-values into a single p-
value for each ROI, and the per-SNP p-values into gene-based
p-values, in order to obtain gene and ROI level results with
possibly a higher detection power. Such an approach can be
based on a statistically rigorous foundation by including a
method analogous to VEGAS [58] (or a similar gene-based
technique) as an additional step in Procedure [1]

In conclusion, we hope that this work can motivate a
scholarly conversation and further research about FDR control
in the context of sparse CCA.

APPENDIX A
ASYMPTOTIC NORMALITY PROOF

In this Section we present the proof of Theorem[I] We need
the following Lemma.

Lemma 1. Assume that A € R?*? and B € R?*? are
symmetric matrices. Let S € R?*? be a random matrix that
/n/nfollows a Wishart distribution with parameters © € R?*?, p
and n. Then it holds that

Cov (tr(AS), tr(BS)) = tr (2n ANB).

Proof. Because A and B are symmetric, we have that

y Giz Siz, y brisket

ij=lyeyP kl=1,...,p

ya LS

ij=l.p — kl=1,

Coy (tr(AS), tr(BS)) = Cov

byw Cov (8:3, Sx)
> ai; [mat (Cov(vec(S)) - vec(B))),;

= tr (A- mat (Cov(vec($))vec(B))) ,

where vec(-) denotes vectorization, and mat(-) denotes ma-
tricization (i.e., the inverse of vectorization).

Now, Proposition 8.3 in 59] together with Kronecker prod-
uct properties implies that

Cov (tr(AS), tr(BS)) = tr (A+ mat ((2nX @ ¥)vec(B)))
= 2ntr (ANBD).

A. Proof of Theorem

Proof. Because the random vectors (x, y), (x@),y),
> (x™, y™) are independent and identically distributed,
and since

1

n

r Ly aw). (yo)
Xx*Yv=— x (y ) Vv,
n
k=1

the multidimensional version of the Central Limit Theorem
immediately gives

vn (Extyw - 1) . N(0,9),

M=E (x : (v)’ -v) ;
Q = Cov (x . (v)" : v) ;

for any k € {1,2,...,n}.

Now, it is left to prove that the entries of jz and 2 have the
form specified in equations Q) and {T0p.

Equation 9) follows directly from the linearity of expec-
tation and the fact that all entries of X and Y are Gaussian
with mean zero.

For notational convenience, denote A := [x Y] and w :=
1x TY v. In order to prove we first observe that

ATA~ W(S,px + py;n),

where

(16)

(17)

which denotes a Wishart distribution with parameters ©,
(px + py) and n, where © is defined by equation
also observe that the entries of w can be written as

wat(s 0 }ata),

5y \veF
lve

eyv"

2n 0

where e; € R? denotes the ith standard basis vector in R?*.
Thus, using Lemma|1| we conclude that

Cov(wi, wy) =

_, 1 [0 ew" 1 [0 ev"

= ner (See 0 iF alee 0 a
_ 1 t ew Sky eww Dy : ejv’ Dey ejv’ Dy
~ In vel Dx vel Dixy vey Dx ve; Uxy

x {tr (ew Dkyesv" Dky) +tr (ew Syvey Ex)
+tr (ve? Exe;v"Sy) +tr (ve? ExyvefExy) }

= {2tr (ew Skyeiv" Sky) + 2tr (v7Syvey Exei) }
mn :

1 PY PY
xy xY T x
aR {( UkPj,k ) (= Uk Pik ) +v bevel}

Moreover, we have that

(18)

i< T
Cov(w) = Cov =Sox®) . (v”) “Vv
ned
1< , y\t 1
= =D Cov (x . (v”) -v) = =2, (19)
k=1
where we used equation and the fact that the random

vectors (xy), (x@ y
pendent and identically distributed.
Finally, equation (18) combined with equation (19) yie

equation (10).

os (x™ y™) are inde-

d

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The work was partially supported by NIH (RO1 GM109068,
RO1 MH104680, RO1 MH107354, P20 GM103472, ROI
REB020407, RO] EB006841) and NSF (#1539067).

REFERENCES

H. Hotelling, “Relations between two sets of variates,” Biometrika, 1936.
D. M. Witten, R. Tibshirani, and T. Hastie, “A penalized matrix
decomposition, with applications to sparse principal components and
canonical correlation analysis,” Biostatistics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 515—
534, Jul. 2009.

D. M. Witten and R. J. Tibshirani, “Extensions of sparse canonical
correlation analysis with applications to genomic data,” Statistical ap-
plications in genetics and molecular biology, vol. 8, 9 Jun. 2009.

E. Parkhomenko, D. Tritchler, and J. Beyene, “Sparse canonical corre-
lation analysis with application to genomic data integration,” Statistical
applications in genetics and molecular biology, vol. 8, 6 Jan. 2009.
K.-A. Lé Cao, P. G. P. Martin, C. Robert-Granié, and P. Besse, “Sparse
canonical methods for biological data integration: application to a cross-
platform study,” BMC bioinformatics, vol. 10, p. 34, 26 Jan. 2009.

S. Waaijenborg, P. C. Verselewel de Witt Hamer, and A. H. Zwin-
derman, “Quantifying the association between gene expressions and
DNA-markers by penalized canonical correlation analysis,” Statistical
applications in genetics and molecular biology, vol. 7, no. 1, 23 Jan.
2008.

D. Lin, V. D. Calhoun, and Y.-P. Wang, “Correspondence between fMRI
and SNP data by group sparse canonical correlation analysis,” Medical
image analysis, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 891-902, Aug. 2014.

L. Du, H. Huang, J. Yan, S. Kim, S. L. Risacher, M. Inlow, J. H. Moore,
A. J. Saykin, L. Shen, and Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative,
“Structured sparse canonical correlation analysis for brain imaging ge-
netics: an improved GraphNet method,” Bioinformatics, vol. 32, no. 10,
pp. 1544-1551, 15 May 2016.

I. Wilms and C. Croux, “Sparse canonical correlation analysis from a
predictive point of view,” Biometrical journal. Biometrische Zeitschrift,
vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 834-851, Sep. 2015.

vu

/n/n20

21

22.

23

24

25

26

27

Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the False Discovery Rate:
A Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing,’ Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical methodology, vol. 57,
no. 1, pp. 289-300, 1995.

R. A. Johnson and D. W. Wichern, Applied multivariate statistical
analysis, 6th ed. Prentice hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2007.

T. D. Satterthwaite, M. A. Elliott, K. Ruparel, J. Loughead, K. Prab-
hakaran, M. E. Calkins, R. Hopson, C. Jackson, J. Keefe, M. Riley
et al., “Neuroimaging of the Philadelphia neurodevelopmental cohort,”
Neurolmage, vol. 86, pp. 544-553, 1 Feb. 2014.

J. Ashburner, G. Barnes, C.-C. Chen, J. Daunizeau, G. Flandin, K. Fris-
ton, S. Kiebel, J. Kilner, V. Litvak, R. Moran er al., “SPM12 Manual
The FIL Methods Group (and honorary members),” 2014.

S. Purcell, B. Neale, K. Todd-Brown, L. Thomas, M. A. R. Ferreira,
D. Bender, J. Maller, P. Sklar, P. I. W. de Bakker, M. J. Daly, and P. C.
Sham, “PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-
based linkage analyses,” American journal of human genetics, vol. 81,
no. 3, pp. 559-575, Sep. 2007.

S. Das, L. Forer, S. Schénherr, C. Sidore, A. E. Locke, A. Kwong,
S. I. Vrieze, E. Y. Chew, S. Levy, M. McGue ef al., “Next-
generation genotype imputation service and methods,” Nature genetics,
vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 1284-1287, Oct. 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.3656
. Price, N. J. Patterson, R. M. Plenge, M. E. Weinblatt, N. A.
Shadick, and D. Reich, “Principal components analysis corrects for
stratification in genome-wide association studies,” Nature genetics,
vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 904-909, Aug. 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng1847

J. T. Leek, R. B. Scharpf, H. C. Bravo, D. Simcha, B. Langmead,
W. E. Johnson, D. Geman, K. Baggerly, and R. A. Irizarry, “Tackling
the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in high-throughput
data,” Nature reviews. Genetics, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 733-739, Oct.
2010. [Online]. Available:
T. Kaufmann, D. Alnes, B Andreassen,
and L. T. Westlye, “Delayed stabilization and individualization in
connectome development are related to psychiatric disorders,” Nature
neuroscience, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 513-515, Apr. 2017.

N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, B. Landeau, D. Papathanassiou, F. Crivello,
O. Etard, N. Delcroix, B. Mazoyer, and M. Joliot, “Automated anatom-
ical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical
parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain,” Neurolmage, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 273-289, Jan. 2002.

J. Radua, M. L. Phillips, T. Russell, N. Lawrence, N. Marshall,
S. Kalidindi, W. El-Hage, C. McDonald, V. Giampietro, M. J.
Brammer ef al., “Neural response to specific components of
fearful faces in healthy and schizophrenic adults,’ Neurolmage,
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 939-946, Jan. 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.08.030.

. Kosaka, N. Sadato,
“Age- -related differences i in the medial temporal lobe

Hippocampus.
Available:

and Y. Yonekura,
responses to emotional faces as revealed by fMRI,”

vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 352-362, 2002.
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/hipo.1113

G. Bush, P. Luu, and M. I. Posner,
influences in anterior cingulate cortex,” Trends in cognitive sciences,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 215-222, Jun. 2000. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10827444
. Etkin, gner, an . Kalisch, “Emotional
anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex,”
sciences, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 85-93, Feb. 2011.

[Online].

“Cognitive and emotional

processing in
Trends in cognitive
[Online]. Available:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.11.004
E. D. Bigler, S. Mortensen, E. S. Neeley, S. Ozonoff, L. Krasny,

M. Johnson, J. Lu, S. L. Provencal, W. McMahon, and J. E.
Lainhart, “Superior temporal gyrus, language function, and autism,”
Developmental neuropsychology, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 217-238, 2007.
[Online]. Available: |http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/87565640701 190841
J. S. Morris, K. J. Friston, C. Biichel, C. D. Frith, . Young,
A. J. Calder, and R. J. Dolan, “A neuromodulatory role for the
human amygdala in processing emotional facial expressions,” Brain: a
journal of neurology, vol. 121 ( Pt 1), pp. 47-57, Jan. 1998. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pubmed/9549487

S. H. Fatemi, A. V. Snow, J. M. Stary, M. Araghi-Niknam, T. J.
Reutiman, S. Lee, A. I. Brooks, and D. A. Pearce, “Reelin signaling
is impaired in autism,” Biological psychiatry, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 777—
787, 1 Apr. 2005.

J. Li, J. Liu, L. Zhao, Y. Ma, M. Jia, T. Lu, Y. Ruan, Q. Li, W. Yue,
D. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Association study between genes in Reelin

[28]

[29]

30.

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40.

41

[42]

signaling pathway and autism identifies DAB1 as a susceptibility gene
in a Chinese Han population,” Progress in neuro-psychopharmacology
& biological psychiatry, vol. 44, pp. 226-232, 1 Jul. 2013.

F. Impagnatiello, A. R. Guidotti, C. Pesold, Y. Dwivedi, H. Caruncho,
M. G. Pisu, D. P. Uzunov, N. R. Smalheiser, J. M. Davis, G. N. Pandey
et al., “A decrease of reelin expression as a putative vulnerability factor
in schizophrenia,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, vol. 95, no. 26, pp. 15 718-15 723, 22 Dec.
1998.

P. Verbrugghe, S. Bouwer, S. Wiltshire, K. Carter, D. Chandler,
M. Cooper, B. Morar, M. F. M. Razif, A. Henders, J. C. Badcock
et al., “Impact of the Reelin signaling cascade (ligands-receptors-adaptor
complex) on cognition in schizophrenia,” American journal of medical
genetics. Part B, Neuropsychiatric genetics: the official publication of
the International Society of Psychiatric Genetics, vol. 159B, no. 4, pp.
392-404, Jun. 2012.

T. M. Herrick and J. A. Cooper, “High affinity binding of Dabl to
Reelin receptors promotes normal positioning of upper layer cortical
plate neurons,” Brain research. Molecular brain research, vol. 126, no. 2,
pp. 121-128, 26 Jul. 2004.

A. Pramatarova, K. Chen, and B. W. Howell, “A genetic interaction
between the APP and Dabl1 genes influences brain development,”
Molecular and cellular neurosciences, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 178-186, Jan.
2008.

L. Feng and J. A. Cooper, “Dual functions of Dab1 during brain
development,” Molecular and cellular biology, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 324—
332, Jan. 2009.

M. A. Marzinke, T. Mavencamp, J. Duratinsky, and M. Clagett-Dame,
“14-3-3e and NAV2 interact to regulate neurite outgrowth and axon
elongation,” Archives of biochemistry and biophysics, vol. 540, no. 1-2,
pp. 94-100, Dec. 2013.

J. L. McClay, D. E. Adkins, K. Aberg, J. Bukszar, A. N. Khachane,
R. S. E. Keefe, D. O. Perkins, J. P. McEvoy, T. S. Stroup, R. E.
Vann et al., “Genome-wide pharmacogenomic study of neurocognition
as an indicator of antipsychotic treatment response in schizophrenia,”
Neuropsychopharmacology: official publication of the American College
of Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 616-626, Feb. 2011.

B. Tabarki, F. Al Mutairi, and A. Al Hashem, “The fragile site WWOX
gene and the developing brain,” Experimental biology and medicine, vol.
240, no. 3, pp. 400-402, Mar. 2015.

M. Alarcén, B. S. Abrahams, J. L. Stone, J. A. Duvall, J. V. Perederiy,
J. M. Bomar, J. Sebat, M. Wigler, C. L. Martin, D. H. Ledbetter
et al., “Linkage, association, and gene-expression analyses identify
CNTNAP2 as an autism-suseeptiility gene,” American journal of
human genetics, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 150-159, Jan. 2008. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10. roie ajhg. 2007: 09.005
O. Peifiagarikano an . Geschwind, at does CNTNAP2
reveal about autism spectrum disorder?” Trends in molecular medicine,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 156-163, Mar. 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2012.01.003:

E. L. Dennis, N. Jahanshad, J. D. Rudie, J. A. Brown, K. Johnson,
K. L. McMahon, G. I. de Zubicaray, G. Montgomery, N. G.
Martin, M. J. Wright er al., “Altered structural brain connectivity
in healthy carriers of the autism risk gene, CNTNAP2,” Brain
connectivity, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 447-459, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0064
~ Tan, T. joke, J. Ashburner, N. W. Wood, and
R. Ss. ‘I, Frackowiak, “Normal variation in fronto-occipital circuitry
and cerebellar structure with an autism-associated polymorphism of
CNTNAP2,” Neurolmage, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1030-1042, Nov. 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.018,
W. Ji, T. Li, Y. Pan, H. Tao, K. Ju, Z. Wen, Y. Fu, Z. An,
Q. Zhao, T. Wang et al., “CNTNAP2 is significantly associated with
schizophrenia and major depression in the Han Chinese population,”
Psychiatry research, vol. 207, no. 3, pp. 225-228, May 2013. [Online].

Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2012.09.024

.¢. eel, A. C.
Stanfield, M. E. Hayiou- -Thomas, E c Johnstone, Ss. M. Lawrie, A. M.
McIntosh, and J. Hall, “Genetic variation in CNTNAP2 alters brain
function during linguistic processing in healthy individuals,” American
journal of medical genetics. Part B, Neuropsychiatric genetics: the
official publication of the International Society of Psychiatric Genetics,
vol. 156B, no. 8, pp. 941-948, Dec. 2011. [Online]. Available:
A. J. O. Whitehouse, D. V. M. Bishop, Q. W. Ang, C. E.
Pennell, and S. E. Fisher, “CNTNAP2 variants affect early language
development in the general population,” Genes, brain, and behavior,
/n/n43

‘45

46.

47

48

‘49

50

51]

[52]

53

54

55

56

vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 451-456, Jun. 2011. [Online].
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00684.x
. Kuroda, M. Oyasu, M. Kawakami, N. Kanayama, K. Tanizawa,
N. Saito, T. Abe, S. Matsuhashi, and K. Ting, “Biochemical
characterization and expression analysis of neural thrombospondin-
1-like proteins NELL1 and NELL2,” Biochemical and biophysical
research communications, vol. 265, no. 1, pp. 79-86, Nov. 1999.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/bbre. 1999. 1638,

S. E. Ensslen-Craig and S. M. Brady-Kalnay, “Receptor protein
tyrosine phosphatases regulate neural development and axon guidance,”
Developmental biology, vol. 275, no. 1, pp. 12-22, Nov. 2004. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.08.009
P. E. McAndrew, A. Frostholm, R. ite, A. Rotter, and A. H.
Burghes, “Identification and characterization of RPTP rho, a novel
RPTP mu/kappa-like receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase whose
expression is restricted to the central nervous system,” Brain research.
Molecular brain research, vol. 56, no. 1-2, pp. 9-21, May 1998.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9602027

J. A. Besco, R. Hooft van Huijsduijnen, A. Frostholm, and
A. Rotter, “Intracellular substrates of brain-enriched receptor protein
tyrosine phosphatase rho (RPTPrho/PTPRT),” Brain research, vol.
1116, no. 1, pp. 50-57, Oct. 2006. [Online]. Available:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2006.07.122
. Davis, L. M. Butcher, S. J. Docherty, E. L. Meaburn, C. J. C.
Curtis, M. A. Simpson, L. C. Schalkwyk, and R. Plomin, “A three-stage
genome-wide association study of general cognitive ability: hunting the
small effects,’ Behavior genetics, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 759-767, Nov. 2010.
R. Corominas, X. Yang, G. N. Lin, S. Kang, Y. Shen, L. Ghamsari,
M. Broly, M. Rodriguez, S. Tam, S. A. Trigg et al., “Protein interaction
network of alternatively spliced isoforms from brain links genetic risk
factors for autism,’ Nature communications, vol. 5, p. 3650, 11 Apr.
2014.

D. Salyakina, D. Q. Ma, J. M. Jaworski, I. Konidari, P. L. Whitehead,
R. Henson, D. Martinez, J. L. Robinson, S. Sacharow, H. H. Wright
et al., “Variants in several genomic regions associated with asperger
disorder,” Autism research: official journal of the International Society
for Autism Research, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 303-310, Dec. 2010.

J. Lasky-Su, B. M. Neale, B. Franke, R. J. L. Anney, K. Zhou,
J. B. Maller, A. A. Vasquez, W. Chen, P. Asherson, J. Buitelaar
et al., “Genome-wide association scan of quantitative traits for attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder identifies novel associations and confirms
candidate gene associations,” American journal of medical genetics. Part
B, Neuropsychiatric genetics: the official publication of the International
Society of Psychiatric Genetics, vol. 147B, no. 8, pp. 1345-1354, 5 Dec.
2008.

R. Anney, L. Klei, D. Pinto, R. Regan, J. Conroy, T. R. Magalhaes,
C. Correia, B. S. Abrahams, N. Sykes, A. T. Pagnamenta ef al., “A
genome-wide scan for common alleles affecting risk for autism,” Human
molecular genetics, vol. 19, no. 20, pp. 4072-4082, 15 Oct. 2010.

S. Curran, P. Bolton, K. Rozsnyai, A. Chiocchetti, S. M. Klauck,
E. Duketis, F. Poustka, S. Schlitt, C. M. Freitag, I. Lee er al., “No associ-
ation between a common single nucleotide polymorphism, rs4141463, in
the MACROD2 gene and autism spectrum disorder,” American journal
of medical genetics. Part B, Neuropsychiatric genetics: the official
publication of the International Society of Psychiatric Genetics, vol.
156B, no. 6, pp. 633-639, Sep. 2011.

R. M. Jones, G. Cadby, J. Blangero, L. J. Abraham, A. J. O. Whitehouse,
and E. K. Moses, “MACROD2 gene associated with autistic-like traits
in a general population sample,” Psychiatric genetics, vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
241-248, Dec. 2014.

S. E. Poduslo, R. Huang, and A. Spiro, 3rd, “A genome screen
of successful aging without cognitive decline identifies LRPIB by
haplotype analysis,’ American journal of medical genetics. Part B,
Neuropsychiatric genetics: the official publication of the International
Society of Psychiatric Genetics, vol. 153B, no. 1, pp. 114-119, 5 Jan.
2010.

YY. Hozumi, M. Watanabe, K. Otani, and K. Goto, “Diacylglycerol kinase
beta promotes dendritic outgrowth and spine maturation in developing
hippocampal neurons,” BMC neuroscience, vol. 10, p. 99, Aug. 2009.
[Online]. Available:
A. Caricasole, E.
F. Caldara, K. Goto, and G. C. TTertapren “Molecular cloning and
characterization of the human diacylglycerol kinase beta (DGKbeta)
gene: alternative splicing generates DGKbeta isotypes with different
properties,” The Journal of biological chemistry, vol. 277, no. 7, pp.
4790-4796, Feb. 2002. [Online]. Available: /http://dx.doi.org/10.1074

jbc.M110249200

Available:

(57]

[58]

[59]

K. Kakefuda, A. Oyagi, M. Ishisaka, K. Tsuruma, M. Shimazawa,
K. Yokota, Y. Shirai, K. Horie, N. Saito, J. Takeda, and H. Hara,
“Diacylglycerol kinase 8 knockout mice exhibit lithium-sensitive
behavioral abnormalities, ” PloS one, vol. 5, no. 10, p. 13447, Oct. 2010.
[Online]. Available:
J. Z. Liu, A. EF McRae, Ny olt, “Med and, R.
Wray, K. M. Brown, AMES. ‘nvestioators N. K. Hayward, c w.
Montgomery, P. M. Visscher et al., “A versatile gene-based test
for genome-wide association studies,’ American journal of human
gener vol. 87, no. 1, Pp. 139-145, Jul. 2010. [Online]. Available:

Saton, Multivariate statistics : a vector space approach, ser.
v. 53. Beachwood, Ohio: Institute of

bectuve notes-monograph series ;
Mathematical Statistics, 2007.
